Now I want to demonstrate something else here with this loop, we can also write an if statement inside
this loop of course and check if let's say i equals 1. If i equals 1, then I will print one,
so now if I execute this,
we of course see one.
We have some keywords we can use in loops as well.
So let's say I am removing this log and I put this after this if statement again and I just print out
i
but now here if i equals 1, I'll use the break keyword.
What do you think we'll now see if I hit run? We just see zero because zero is the initial value,
this if statement isn't triggered and therefore, we print zero.
Now i is incremented and therefore 1,
so we get inside this if statement
and as with the switch statement, break tells Javascript to exit out of the current control structure,
so
out of this loop here. On the other hand, what happens if I type continue here? Let's see what happens
if I hit run now, I get 0,2,3,4,
so 1 is not printed out.
The reason for this is that if i equals 1, we immediately continue with the next iteration and the code
after this here is no longer executed
but only for the current iteration of course.
So we're not skipping out of the complete control structure, like we did with break,
we're only finishing the current iteration and to tell Javascript to continue with the next one.
That's nice but what happens if I have a loop inside a loop?
So I'll add my loop from before again and I'll take all that code and put it inside here or that should
actually stay outside.
So if I hit run now, what do you think will happen?
Well, I still see all these values
and why is this happening?
Because this continue statement here which is triggered if i is 1, which certainly is the case
upon the second iteration, will only refer to this inner loop,
so this inner loop will continue which doesn't really matter because we weren't executing code here anyways
.
So if I print something here inside inner loop, j equals and then j and we can combine a string and a number
by adding a plus sign between string and number
variable by the way or we can add any variable, not just numbers like this, so
we can combine a string and a variable by adding plus and can print this out,
so what do you think will happen now if I hit run?
OK,
we get the inner loop, j equals zero
and so on
and then we print 0
but notice that we then only print 1. So for the case that i is 1, this part here is never executed
which is why we have this gap here where we were missing this output.
So continue refers to the inner loop,
what happens if I type break here, let me clear this,
what do you think we'll see.
It's the same behavior,
we're breaking out of the inner loop, not of the loop overall, not of the outer loop, just of the inner loop
.
So that's important to understand, that the
continue and break only refer to the loop in which they are written, not to any other wrapping
loops you might have around them.